>>LISA GARR: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr,
host of "Gaiam Inspirations."
I recently saw a movie
called "The Immortalists"
about two eccentric
scientists struggling
to discover medical
breakthroughs to create
eternal youth.
The movie documents a
fascinating community
of scientists who look at the
aging process as a disease.
Joining me are the filmmakers
Jason Sussberg and David
Alvarado to talk about
how the film got made
and why someone would
want to live forever.
Welcome, thank you
for being here.
>>DAVID ALVARADO:
Happy to be here.
>>JASON SUSSBERG: Thanks.
>>LISA: So what attracted you
to the topic of anti-aging
in the first place?
David, I'll start with you.
>>ALVARADO: Well,
Jason and I are
both really
interested in science.
I We always have been.
And when we started to
figure out what kind of film
we could make, we learned about
this very interesting community
of scientists who
looked at aging
not as a thing that's natural
and should be expected
and should be
desired, but instead
as a disease that
could be, in principle,
stopped and maybe even reversed.
>>LISA: Do you mean
the unhelpful aspects
of getting old where
degenerative disease happens
or just the accelerated
years being the disease?
>>ALVARADO: Well, right
now, as human beings,
the more years we live, the
more our bodies fall apart.
>>LISA: Break down, yeah.
>>ALVARADO: And so
their idea would
be time would
still move forward,
but obviously, you
don't get older anymore.
So you would still be collecting
years of wisdom and experience,
but you just wouldn't be
falling apart as you did that.
>>LISA: And then
how long did it take
you to make the film, Jason?
>>SUSSBERG: Yeah, we
began pre-production
in the fall of
2010, and we didn't
premier until March of 2014.
So it was a long road.
It was about three
years total from when
we started to when we
actually printed off the DCP
and sent it to the festivals.
We did about a year of
pre-production, a year
and a half of production, and
that's built into the edit.
We were sort of
editing the whole time.
>>LISA: Yeah, I
was going to say,
when you get into
something like this,
is it a discovery
process along the way?
Because you really can't
script something like this.
Because there's
such an unknown when
it goes into this whole world
we don't even know about.
>>ALVARADO: Yeah, absolutely.
In the film, we were interested
in the whole community
of scientists who are
trying to do this task.
But really, we
found out much later
after starting production, that
we were fascinated with two
of them, just two
guys that are obsessed
with this goal of
trying to live forever.
And we wanted to
understand what motivated
them to do that,
why they dedicated
their entire lives to it.
These guys don't have children,
they have a very small family,
their whole life
is just absolutely
dedicated to this thing that
seems entirely impossible.
>>LISA: Either that or the CIA.
>>ALVARADO: Right.
>>LISA: So they
specifically have this,
and they go to extremes
to prove the fact that we
can live forever.
And the science is out there.
So Bill Andrews, let's talk
about him for a second.
How did you meet Bill?
>>ALVARADO: Well,
Bill is interesting
because we had already been
talking to other scientists.
And then he contacted
us, saying he
ran this huge telomere
research facility.
He said telomeres are the way
of the future for age reversing.
So we weren't sure what to
make about that when we first
talked to him.
But Jason and I went
down and visited
his labs, Sierra
Sciences, in Reno.
And sure enough,
once we met him,
we said this guy is
very interesting.
He's compelling.
He's completely
dedicated to the task
and almost just absolutely
obsessed with it.
>>LISA: Hyper-focused.
>>ALVARADO: Yeah.
>>LISA: So he's
an ultramarathoner
who runs 100-mile races a week.
A week, right?
>>ALVARADO: That's right.
>>LISA: So he's got to have some
secret to youth there in order
to regenerate as
fast as he does.
Did you know in
the beginning you
were going to be
going to run with him
in a race in the Himalayas?
I love the movie,
that it took us there.
But was this something that
you had planned for in advance?
>>SUSSBERG: Yeah, we knew
the history of Bill's race.
Because in the story,
Bill tries to do the race,
and then he ends
being airlifted out.
This was in 2011.
He goes back in 2012
to try to finish
the race that he started.
>>LISA: So this
happened during the time
you were doing the film?
>>SUSSBERG: Yeah.
The first race when
he got injured,
we were not making
the move by then.
When we came on board-- it
was actually 2010, sorry--
but when we came on
board to do the film,
he was going back to the
Himalayas to slay this dragon,
vanquish this foe that
he was unable to finish
the first time.
So we were aware of it
in the back of our minds.
We also really wanted to
focus on that aspect of life
because it is,
metaphorically speaking,
he's running against
the ultimate clock.
He's competing against
death and also competing
against his own aging.
So we really like the idea of
the marathon being this analogy
that we could latch onto.
So we just didn't know what race
we were going to film with him.
Then we heard of this mythic
race that was in the Himalayas,
and it's 18,000 feet
above sea level.
It's got the highest
motorable pass--
meaning that cars can actually
go over-- which is essentially
a base camp for Mount Everest,
which is 18,000 feet high.
And it's multiple days,
it's over 24 hours,
and it's 138 miles.
>>LISA: To run?
>>SUSSBERG: To run, yes.
Straight, without
sleeping, without anything.
He was eating while
he was running.
He only stopped to
fix his blisters.
And there was a
moment where he almost
doesn't come back to the race.
But we knew we were going to
focus on one of the races.
We just didn't know it
was going to be that one.
>>ALVARADO: And keep in
mind that Bill at the time
was 62 years old.
Is that right?
>>SUSSBERG: Yeah.
>>LISA: Yes.
So he's well into
the anti-aging.
But he says so
clearly in the film
that we are so close to
finding the eternal youth
serum, essentially,
which he is convinced of.
After all the research that
you did and from drilling
into this scientific community,
do you feel that we're close?
>>SUSSBERG: I think it's
our job as filmmakers
to present a compelling story to
entertain people along the way
and let the scientists
speak for themselves.
Don't have degree in science
news David worth enthusiasts
so I think it's up to the viewer
to really listen to these guys
and do their own research.
But I think the
science is out there,
and it's super compelling.
And if nothing else,
it tells a great story.
>>LISA: It does.
We're going to take
a look at a trailer
of the film "The Immortalists."
Let's take a look.
>>BILL ANDREWS: Hundreds
of years from now,
we're going to look
back and be shocked
about this horrible
world that we all
used to live in where people
used to get old and die.
>>AUBREY DE GREY:
We're interested not
in slowing aging down but
in actually reversing it,
turning back the
biological clock.
This is not science fiction.
Even if I bring forward the
defeat of aging by just one
day, you know, that's
100,000 lives that I'll save.
It's just astronomical.
>>ANDREWS: Harvard
has actually been
able to reverse
aging in mice using
telomere-lengthening technology.
>>DE GREY: Once we are really
truly repairing things as fast
as they go wrong, game over.
We will have the ability
to live indefinitely.
>>ANDREWS: Curing
aging is a race.
The clock ticks once.
The telomerase pushes it back.
It ticks again.
>>MOLLY SHERIDAN: If
Bill gets to his goal,
then our marriage is
forever, and ever, and ever.
Think about that one.
>>DE GREY: I can view myself
as a poster boy, so to speak.
There's going to be much less
difference between people
of different chronological ages.
>>COLIN BLAKEMORE: This is snake
oil, and dangerous snake oil.
>>MAN: Dr. Andrews is simply
a more recent iteration
of similar personalities
in the past.
>>ANDREWS: I'm not surprised
that people don't believe us.
>>BLAKEMORE: What I
really worry about is
the possibility of a
sudden breakthrough,
of the bigger question
about humanity as a whole.
>>DE GREY: If my mother
had been healthy enough
to benefit from these
future therapies,
then she would very
much have wanted to.
She had definitely
not run out of things
that she wanted to do in
her life by any means.
>>ANDREWS: We are going to
find something soon enough
to allow my 84-year-old father
to see his own aging reversed.
>>RALPH ANDREWS:
Life is so funny
because you learn,
and learn, and learn.
And just about the
time you've learned
what you wanted
to learn, you die.
>>DE GREY: It sometimes
escapes the general public
that scientists are
actually human beings.
They enjoy having a
good time as well.
>>ANDREWS: I really
don't know what
does happen when a person dies.
I want a doctor.
There's no glory in dying.
>>LISA: OK, so did you
choose to segment this film
into certain portions in the
beginning, middle, and end?
Was there a science part
and then a story part?
Did you choose to storyboard
it in a certain way?
>>SUSSBERG: Yeah.
>>DE GREY: One of you.
Sorry.
>>SUSSBERG: Yeah, sure.
That's a great question.
So we actually spent
a great deal of time
talking about structure,
how we were actually
going to put this
thing together.
So we knew we had two characters
by the time we were actually
in the edit room.
At one point, we had many,
many more characters.
But after we whittled
it down to two,
it became a really easy
way to edit the film.
Because we would have
a seen with Aubrey,
have a scene with Bill,
introduce, perhaps,
a new character.
But we were really focused on
telling their personal lives.
So it was not just the science,
but who they were with,
what partnerships they had,
who were the scientists who
agreed with them, who
were the scientists that
disagreed with them.
So yeah, we spent a lot of time.
We were trained, as
documentary filmmakers,
to pay attention to these
stories and not to make it
just merely a talking
head experience,
but to make it a story that
had a beginning, a middle,
and an end.
>>LISA: Stories tell.
They explain so much.
Everything is based
on storytelling.
It's an ancient art form of
explanation and learning.
>>ALVARADO: It's true.
>>LISA: So I think
that was a good choice.
You could see any
documentary on the science,
and talking heads,
and ficus trees.
But you did a good job of really
giving through the story there.
So Aubrey, how did you guys
meet and come across Aubrey?
He's quite the character.
>>ALVARADO: He really is.
Well, Aubrey de Grey is one
of the more famous people
in the world of age
reversing and biogerontology.
He stood out to us immediately
as an interesting character.
Not just his personality
and his science, but even
the way he looks.
He has this long, red beard.
And he just has this charisma
that people are really
fascinated with.
And so it was obvious to
us that if he would give us
the opportunity to film
him, that would make sense.
And so after spending
a little time with him,
we realized this is really the
guy that can carry the story.
>>LISA: He also causes
a certain amount
of agitation in the audience.
Have you noticed that?
>>ALVARADO: Absolutely.
>>LISA: He's got some
distinctive personality traits
and perspectives on life
about polyamorous lifestyles
and community living.
So how did you choose to exploit
that and also not discredit him
at the same time?
>>ALVARADO: Well,
it's interesting
because we set out to create a
document of what we found when
we got access to
these people's lives.
And so we never filmed anything
that anybody didn't want us to.
And so when Aubrey started
to welcome us into his life,
we found that he was
polyamorous and that he
likes to drink a lot.
And I think that he's OK with
people knowing this about him.
And the fact that he's
a very proud nudist.
He enjoys spending time
with his wife in the woods
just absolutely in the nude.
And that's a part of the
relationship that they have.
And so when we
discovered that, we
asked if they wouldn't
mind if we filmed it.
They allowed it.
And we thought that that
was important for people
to understand, that behind
these brilliant minds
are these very interesting
personality traits
that many of us might
conceive as odd.
And so it made a lot
of sense to show that.
>>LISA: Well, it
makes perfect sense
that he welcomed you into that.
And he explained his
life in a certain way.
But have people, in your
opinion, when they-- well,
actually, I'm going to have
the audience take a look.
Take a look and form
your own opinion.
Here's a clip of Aubrey de Grey.
>>DE GREY: I'm certainly
not inclined to get sick.
I do not want to get Alzheimer's
disease, or cancer, or any
of the things that afflicts
people when they have
the misfortune to have
been born a long time ago.
So I do not want to end
up in a place like this.
The concept that I developed
is all about the application
of regenerative medicine
to the problems of aging.
Aging is a process that
happens naturally in the body.
It's all about damage--
molecular and cellular damage
that accumulates in
the body over time
and eventually kills
us through the creation
of various diseases.
Molecular garbage,
really, in the cell.
What we want to do
is fix the problem
by introducing new enzymes that
the human body doesn't have,
that are found in other
species, and that can break down
the substances that
we can't break down.
It's really just
same as the concept
of keeping your house
reasonably free of garbage.
You have to take garbage out of
your house once a week or so.
If you take a month,
then the house
doesn't work as
well as it used to.
And that's just the
same in the human body.
Graveyards are
somewhat paradoxical.
They accumulate only
certain components
of decomposed human
bodies, but not
molecules that accumulate
throughout life
and eventually cause some of
the most important diseases
of old age, such as
cardiovascular disease
and macular degeneration.
The fact that they don't
accumulate in graveyards
means that something in the
soil is breaking them down
even though nothing in the
human body can break them down.
So in principle, we
might be able to identify
the bacteria which are able
to break these things down.
And then we might be able to
identify the genes and enzymes
that they use.
Once we get to a point of
sufficient comprehensiveness
of the maintenance, where we are
really, truly repairing things
as fast as they go
wrong, game over.
We will have the ability
to live indefinitely.
>>LISA: So what Aubrey
says makes so much sense
about clearing the
garbage out of the cells.
And he's actually
the one, ultimately,
that got the funding in terms
of his scientific discoveries.
So he's a brilliant scientist.
But have you surveyed the
audiences after the show?
Have people liked or
disliked his character?
Do they find him abrasive
or do they talk more
about the science?
What's the feedback
been from the audience?
>>ALVARADO: Well, I
think Jason and I both
have found that the feedback is
different all over the place.
We've shown the film in
London, and Moscow, and Canada,
and just all over the world.
And it's always different.
We like to get a show of hands.
If you could take this kind of
technology, would you do it?
And on the counter end,
this is the worst idea ever.
And it's just so interesting
to see the different responses.
And frankly, the most fun
part of showing the film
is talking to people
afterwards and hearing
the kinds of conversations that
the film begets in the crowd.
>>LISA: What's the
biggest response?
Yes?
Yea or nay?
>>ALVARADO: Well, I think
it depends on where you are.
For some reason, everybody in
Canada wants to live forever.
Almost unanimously,
those hands go up.
In LA, it was pretty high up.
We've been in Wisconsin
where it was really low.
People mostly thought that
was the worst idea ever.
It's been completely mixed.
>>LISA: Has most of
the nay response--
not that it was
negative, but no, they
wouldn't want to
live forever-- is
that mostly associated
with ethical perspectives
on over population, and
religious views, and so forth?
>>ALVARADO: I'd say
it's across the board.
People have very valid concerns
about the overpopulation
control, the carrying
capacity of the planet.
The fact that we've created
our whole culture and family
structures around the idea that
eventually, your grandparents
are going to pass
away, and they're
going to leave you
something, and then
you're in charge of the
family after that, and so on.
And so our psyches
and our traditions
have all been around
the simple idea
that we're all supposed
to die eventually.
>>LISA: True.
>>ALVARADO: So there's a lot
of concerns all over the place.
>>LISA: That's interesting.
If it were up to you guys,
would you choose to live forever
or to die trying?
>>SUSSBERG: It's
a great question.
It's hard not to think about.
During the production
of the film,
it was a conversation that
we were constantly fielding,
and also something that was
a big topic of concern when
we were doing the project.
At the time, I turned 30.
I got married.
David turned 30.
So aging was something
that was always
in the background of our minds.
I think Aubrey says
it best when he
says he doesn't want to
get heart disease, cancer,
diabetes, Alzheimer's,
Parkinson's, anything
that is age-related ill health.
And in that sense,
I think everybody
would agree that avoiding
age-related ill health
is a good thing.
But as David said, there's
many, many, many concerns
that go well beyond
whether or not
you personally want
that for yourself.
There are societal concerns.
>>LISA: Right.
>>ALVARADO: And people
are living longer already.
There's what they call
the silver tsunami--
the baby boomers who are
now starting to retire,
starting to depend on
government assistance,
and are getting less and less
healthy as they get older.
But they're living longer than
other generations before them.
So it's a multifaceted problem,
and it's worth talking about.
>>LISA: So you didn't
answer my question.
>>ALVARADO: Would
I personally do it?
I think so.
But it's also a
different question.
You can't say that and not
also answer the question, well,
does everybody else
need to do it too?
>>LISA: True.
>>ALVARADO: Because
how could you
do it if you wouldn't want
everybody else to do it?
Well, once everybody else does
it, then that's a huge problem.
>>LISA: Right.
We don't want to really be
out-living our children.
And then you would have
to give them the solution.
So would this type of
age reversal process
be only for the elite?
Would it be cost
prohibitive for the survival
of those on the
lower economic scale?
>>ALVARADO: I feel,
my personal opinion,
is that that's the most
realistic nightmare scenario,
is that you have a wealthy
overclass of immortals types
people, and then a lower class
who are working and living
short lives, and
dying, and can't
afford the medical technology.
But then framed in the real
world that we actually live in,
that's exactly what it's like.
Wealthy people can
afford the best medicine.
The poorest people can't.
And that's not a
reason not to develop
better and better medicine.
So we actually live in the
world with the same types
of problems.
It's just not as extreme.
And this is a way that we'd like
to think about the film too,
is that the film is about
this fantastical idea
that maybe we
could live forever.
Sure.
But it also touches on
these very real things
that are actually
happening right now.
>>LISA: Well, it's a
microcosm of what's
happening in society and
communities these days.
But the solution that Bill found
is actually very inexpensive.
It's just a supplement
that extends telomeres.
And that was through the
scientific discoveries
apparently.
If you can extend the
telomeres, then you
can extend the lifespan.
And so that one wasn't-- but
I'm not quite sure about what
Aubrey had discovered.
>>SUSSBERG: Well, yes.
So Bill's discovery
is yet to be found.
He's looking for
a pharmaceutical,
a small molecule that
will extend our telomeres
indefinitely, thereby, in
his opinion, reversing aging.
But the supplement-- that's
a plant extract-- actually
won't really go that
far in reversing aging.
In fact, it just barely
lengthens the telomeres.
So he's still digging.
He essentially partnered
with that person--
the nutraceutical, not to be
confused with pharmaceutical--
in order to keep
his funding going.
But he has even said that it's
not really doing very much.
It's a very slow amount.
Aubrey's solution is not a
silver bullet like Bill's.
He wants to repair aging using
seven different mechanisms.
He calls it SENS.
And it probably be a confluence
of factors and therapies
that all come together
to rejuvenate people.
So it's a lot more
sophisticated and harder.
And Aubrey predicts that
even with sufficient funding,
there's a 50-50
chance it could work.
So it's a lot further
down the road.
He didn't really come up
with any particular therapy.
>>LISA: Anti-aging
medicine is one
of the largest growing
health factors in industries,
in most communities, most
health-related communities.
There's anti-aging centers.
And there's a huge amount
of books and so forth.
People have changed
their entire practices
to anti-aging practices.
We actually have a clip here of
one of the anti-aging centers
with that Dr. Terry Grossman.
Take a look.
>>TERRY GROSSMAN: My
name is Terry Grossman.
I'm an anti-aging physician.
And the reason people
come to this clinic
is because they don't
ever want to die.
So what's your
family history like?
>>DE GREY: Well,
actually, there's
not much I can
tell you about that
because my family is so small.
I don't have any brothers,
or sisters, or kids.
And my father left my
mother before I was born.
I know nothing about him.
Yeah.
So basically, a
pretty healthy family.
>>GROSSMAN: When
did you first find
that you had plaque
in your arteries?
>>ANDREWS: Oh, I want to
say probably 25 years ago.
>>GROSSMAN: So you were only 35?
>>ANDREWS: Yeah.
>>GROSSMAN: That's pretty young
for plaque in your arteries.
>>ANDREWS: I don't have
any other markers--
>>GROSSMAN: We've been
increasing our life expectancy
steadily.
So right now, you
live for a year,
we're adding two
and a half months.
You live for a year, we're
adding two and a half months.
Eventually, they're
going to touch.
But how about the point that you
live for a day, we add a day.
You live for a
day, we add a day.
At that point, the
horizon just keeps moving.
And in fact, particularly when
we solve the telomere problem,
we've, in effect, achieved
human immortality.
We could live long
enough to live forever
by passing over three bridges.
Bridge one essentially
is the medicine
of today-- the medical
and lifestyle therapies
that are available to keep
us as healthy as possible.
Things like diet, and exercise,
and stress management.
Bridge one will
take us to bridge
two, which largely is the
biotechnology revolution.
In our clinic, we're
using stem cells
that are found in
belly fat because those
are the only cells in the body
that actually have the capacity
to repair.
And this will occur over
the next couple of decades
and take us to the mid
2030s, in which time
bridge three-- the nanotech
revolution-- will take hold.
The hallmark of the
nanotech revolution
will be the advent of
devices such as nanobots.
The nanobots will detect
problems and repair them.
We're talking about life
expectancies measured
in centuries.
>>LISA: OK, so you have
a certain responsibility
as journalists and filmmakers
to present the opposing factor.
So Aubrey de Grey says that
Bill's method is actually
going to cause cancer.
Why did you put that
particular part in
even though it's
completely debatable?
>>SUSSBERG: Go ahead.
>>LISA: Sorry.
>>ALVARADO: It's fine.
So it's funny because
Jason and I don't really
fully see ourselves
as journalists.
For us, we came to the
story not because we
wanted to report on this,
so much as we wanted
to tell a story about these
interesting people who
are doing something.
And we don't quite understand
what they're doing,
so we wanted to know more.
And once we started to
ask the questions about,
is their science real?
And if it was real, would
that even be desirable?
That's when we wanted to
see the other people who
were in their lives who
disagreed with them,
and then to present
those people as well.
So it was really
just an exercise
of our own personal interest.
Who disagrees with these guys?
And why do they?
And are those
arguments just as valid
as the ones that they
seem to be making?
>>LISA: And good journalist
are storytellers as well.
So yeah, in a way.
Why did you decide to have
the anti-cancer and the cancer
causing aspects in the film?
>>SUSSBERG: Well, that has yet
to be determined what is true.
So Aubrey suggests
that if we figure out
a way to shorten telomeres,
to delete the gene that
causes telomerase, that
would prevent cancers
from being caused.
Bill has the exact
opposite belief.
He believes that if we
lengthen the telomeres in all
of our cells, that
will help fight cancer.
These are just
proof of concepts.
There's no way to actually know
until we actually do studies,
test them on animals, and
let the science report back
to the scientific community
over what is the right approach.
Science is a funny thing.
If you want to refute
science, run the experiments,
rewind them, and put
forth a different theory.
And then it should
either check out or not.
So I think that it's nice to
have a little conversation
between the two of them over
what theories they think,
but right now, it's
really up to them
to put the proof in the pudding.
>>LISA: Has the
scientific community
given you any
feedback on the film?
>>ALVARADO: Yes, they
all say there's not
enough science, which
is probably true.
But we do really enjoy the
fact that the film gets people
to look into the
science themselves,
to ask questions themselves, to
have debates amongst themselves
about the philosophy
and everything else.
So that's been very rewarding.
>>LISA: Do you have
blogs and online chats
going back and forth
about the movie?
Do you have that set up?
>>ALVARADO: We do have a
blog on theimmortalists.com.
People can look at
some updates from what
the film is doing,
where it's showing,
and what people are
saying about the film.
>>LISA: So they can see
this in independent theaters
around them.
They just need to look
it up and find out
where it's showing
around their area, right?
>>ALVARADO: That's correct.
>>LISA: It's not on DVD release
or anything at this point?
>>ALVARADO: Not yet.
>>LISA: Other than Gaiam
TV, which is fantastic.
All right.
So there's another whole
opposing perspective
that's presented in the
film in Aubrey's hometown.
And he is brought in front
of a review board there.
Did that come up by chance
when you were filming?
>>SUSSBERG: Mhm.
Yeah.
So it's actually
Oxford, England,
and actually, Aubrey's
from Cambridge.
And so he's invited to a debate.
And they had a long legacy of
doing these scientific debates
at Oxford.
And so on the one
hand, we have Aubrey
saying that we should
live as long as possible,
and we should do
everything to defeat aging.
On the other hand, there's
Dr. Colin Blakemore
who says that it's neither
desirable nor is it feasible.
And we did not
actually set that up.
That was happening organically.
And it allowed us to get into
the ethical, thornier issues,
and to let other sides present
their case that what Aubrey was
saying was not desirable
and was misguided.
We actually learned about
that about three days
before it happened.
Aubrey let us know that,
hey, this debate's happening.
>>LISA: That's
gold for you guys.
>>SUSSBERG: Yeah.
This might be great
for your film.
And at the time, we immediately
started producing it,
and we turned it
around really quick.
But that was
happening organically.
And we always wanted things
to happen in the film
as they happened in real life.
We really kept a
gentle touch on it.
We didn't really want
to force anything
to actually happen
other than what
was happening in real life.
>>LISA: I love the
timing of this.
I'm going to have you
take a look at this clip.
And just pay attention to
the timing, and the music,
and the contemplation
that you allow
the audience to have
within this debate.
It's really great.
It's very well done.
Take a look.
>>ANDREWS: 85% to 95% of all
cancers produce telomerase.
That has led a lot
of people to believe
that telomerase is
the cause of cancer.
But it's not.
The most direct thing
that causes cancers
is the mutations.
So the key is to prevent these
mutations from occurring.
But one of the biggest
causes of these mutations
is short telomeres.
>>DE GREY: Telomerase
in human beings
is expressed at very low
levels, only just enough
to allow cells to get
along for a lifetime.
But cancers express high levels
of telomerase most of the time.
About 90% of cancers
express really high levels.
>>ANDREWS: Now look at this.
A low level of oxidative stress.
>>DE GREY: OK.
And what was mine again?
>>WOMAN: 232, I believe it was.
>>DE GREY: Better than normal.
>>ANDREWS: Wow.
I'm getting slaughtered here.
>>DE GREY: You're just
doing too much running.
That's what it is.
>>ANDREWS: What
Aubrey wants to do
is destroy the telomerase
gene in all of our cells
in our body.
And that would then decrease
our chances of getting cancer.
>>DE GREY: My approach
is to actually use
telomere shortening as
an anticancer mechanism.
It's called WILT.
That stands for
Whole-Body Interdiction
of Lengthening of Telomeres,
if you really want to know.
>>ANDREWS: I conceded
that Aubrey beat me
on the age scan test.
But then I said to
him, but let's see
you do as well as I did
when you're 60 years old.
And he just looks at me and
says, I'm going to do better.
>>DE GREY: I notice I'm just
getting a lot of reflection
off the ceiling light.
I don't know.
It's just hard to see on this.
F, D, L, O, P, Z, D. OK.
And the next one--
oh, god almighty.
>>ANDREWS: So really, telomerase
does not cause cancer.
Cancer causes telomerase.
But if telomerase
makes a cell healthier,
it's going to make a
cancer cell healthier too.
Go, Aubrey.
Go.
>>DE GREY: At this
point, we don't
know which of these
approaches is actually
going to be more
promising in the long run.
>>ANDREWS: And if it turns out
that telomerase is a bad thing,
that's really bad news for us.
Because there is no
way that we're ever
going to be able to cure aging
unless we can figure out a way
to prevent telomeres
from shortening.
>>LISA: OK, so you chose to
focus on the stories of both
of these particular scientists,
very opposing stories.
Bill, who found finally
his lifelong love,
and who's a really
perfect match for him.
Throughout the course of the
film, they got married, right?
And you got to witness
that and be a part of that.
Did he know he was going to
marry her before the film?
Or were you a part of
that process as well?
>>SUSSBERG: Yeah, again, we like
to keep a very light footprint.
It's not like we told
Bill to get married.
>>LISA: Right.
No pressure.
>>ALVARADO: No pressure.
>>LISA: Making a
documentary of my life.
No pressure to get married.
>>SUSSBERG: Yeah.
But we learned on
the first day that we
met him this story of how he was
engaged five different times.
He decided not to
become married.
And then he told us about
his girlfriend Molly,
who was amazing,
and how they planned
to go back to the Himalayas.
So that seed was planted.
I think he may have known.
And in fact, there
was an engagement.
But Bill could have
backed out of that.
But ultimately, we went back
to the Himalayas with him.
And sure enough, they were
planning this all along.
So we were vaguely aware
this was going to happen.
It was a two-person ceremony--
just the two of them,
and the monk Lama Sespel and us.
So we were witness
to their wedding.
>>LISA: So they got a
permanent wedding video
from you guys, which
is really nice.
>>ALVARADO: Literally, we put
together a video for them just
as a--
>>SUSSBERG: Yeah.
Actually, David was editing
on one of the off days
and gave it to them
as a wedding gift.
And they cherish it.
>>LISA: Very nice.
One of the listeners
at the screening
pointed out the
fact that they got
married in a temple that
believes in reincarnation.
>>ALVARADO: That's true.
And yet, they'd rather
not reincarnate.
They'd rather just
stay incarnate.
>>LISA: Just stay
living forever.
And now Aubrey, in his
several different situations,
his wife is a scientist.
And she was pretty
clearly not-- she
said this is not my scene to be
in a polyamorous relationship.
How do you really
display that information
without being partial
to her opinion on it?
>>SUSSBERG: Yeah,
that was something
that we certainly
wrestled with in the edit.
Ultimately, as
David said, the film
is a document of what we
learned over the course of four
years of pre-production,
production, and editing.
So it would be unfair to release
the film with Aubrey being
in this polyamorous
relationship without actually
hearing from Adelaide.
I think people want to know
what does his wife think.
So.
I think we did it in
a way that allowed
her to have a final word.
And Aubrey sees himself as
having a futuristic lifestyle.
Part of his futuristic lifestyle
involves many partners.
Adelaide didn't feel that way.
But ultimately, those were the
opinions of the characters.
And it wasn't really
our decision-making.
It was up to the
characters, and this
is the life they were living.
>>LISA: Right, and he said he's
the poster boy of anti-aging.
>>ALVARADO: That's right.
>>LISA: Is he as sarcastic
as he appears in the film?
>>ALVARADO: Oh,
yeah, absolutely.
Just trying to sit down with
him and get an interview,
questions answered, was
just-- it was funny at times,
frustrating at other times.
But ultimately, we really
enjoyed him as a person.
He's fun, and smart, and just
incredibly engaging to talk to.
>>LISA: Has he seen the film?
>>ALVARADO: He
has seen the film.
Yeah.
>>LISA: And has he
commented back to you guys?
Or has he moved on?
>>ALVARADO: Yes.
He likes the film.
He hates the title.
For him, actually, the
title "The Immortalists"
is a little bit of a
mischaracterization
of what he's trying to do.
Because after all,
he's not trying
to make anybody immortal.
And so he knows why
we made that decision,
but ultimately, I
think he'll benefit.
>>LISA: I've said
several times, it
seems like a superhero complex,
that term "the immortalists."
We are here to save the day.
And that's not what
they're necessarily up to.
They're really up to
trying to sustain life
in a healthy way, which
is more important.
Do you have a plan for
a second documentary?
Has this sparked a
lot more conversations
as to where you want
to go from here?
>>SUSSBERG: Yeah.
David and I are
committed to doing films
on science, and
technology, and big ideas.
And so after this film, we
are doing pre-production
and research right now on a
couple of different topics.
So this isn't the
last film of ours.
We'll definitely keep on
producing stuff in the future.
>>LISA: And what were
you doing before this?
Before this particular film?
>>ALVARADO: We were in
graduate school together.
So we did a two-year
Master's of Fine Arts
program at Stanford University.
And we did a lot of short films.
10-minute films about
science and other things.
Jason did a political film
and a short film about science
as well.
And through watching each
other do our own films,
we saw that we're interested
in the same ideas.
And so sure enough,
we got together
to make this film
once we graduated.
>>LISA: Wow, so this is
fresh out of graduate school.
>>ALVARADO: That's right.
>>LISA: You've aired
it at film festivals,
and it's received a lot of
accolade from film festivals.
Yes?
>>SUSSBERG: Yeah,
we went all over.
The film's been in, I think,
over 30 to 40-ish festivals
all across America, the world.
We've played in Moscow,
Ireland, the UK, Copenhagen,
you name it.
It's really had an amazing run.
So we were really fortunate
and privileged too.
>>LISA: So across the
board, a great response.
>>ALVARADO: Pretty good.
There are critics who think
that we are either overly
enthusiastic about their
goals, and other critics
who think that we are
degrading their goals.
But we'd like to think
that we're leaving it
to the audience to
determine what they think
about these guys
and who they are.
But overall, we've
been very happy
with the critical review
of the film as a film.
>>LISA: Wow.
It's going to give you a
lot of attention as well.
I'm going to have you take a
look at this particular clip,
and again, you can
make your decision
about this story
that's depicted here.
Take a look.
>>ADELAIDE CARPENTER:
Aubrey's expectation
is for me to either
retire or have
some way of doing my
research in California.
And that just clearly
wouldn't work.
>>DE GREY: Certainly,
the expectation
of living a very long
time might very well
lead to a reevaluation of the
value of permanent monogamy.
>>CARPENTER: We're
still married.
We're still in love
with each other.
But he has to be
with other women.
His ideal, I think, would
be to have a situation where
all of his women lived
together, and he could just
live with all of them.
And I just so-- it's
so not my scene.
>>DE GREY: This is more or less
the beginning of the property.
That leads to the front.
There's another way up on my
left that goes to the back.
And then here's the
main thing up the drive.
Quite a sight.
I guess I can view myself as
something of a poster boy,
so to speak, for
future lifestyle.
So here's the amazing house.
I believe that in the
relatively near future when
we've brought aging under very
considerable medical control,
there's going to be much less
difference between people
of different chronological ages.
I have three
partners in my life,
and they are of
very different ages.
My wife is 68, and my two
girlfriends are 45 and 24.
>>KIM: We started a community
built as an immortality
and polyamorous haven.
And I feel lucky to
have found myself
in the melting pot
of these two realms.
>>DE GREY: What an
amazing place this is.
It's going to take me a while
to stop pinching myself.
Here we go.
Cheers, my love.
My ultimate goal on
the longevity mission
is to become obsolete.
To do enough that there
are people out there who
are better than me who,
therefore, will supplant me
in terms of being really the
spearhead of this mission.
And I will be very grateful
to have the opportunity
to retreat into
glorious obscurity.
And I can tell you
that this is where
I will be spending a lot
of that retreating time.
>>LISA: So the film
"The Immortalists"
has qualified for the Academy
Award in terms of documentary.
How does that work, for
future documentarians here?
How do you get a film to
qualify for the Academy's?
>>ALVARADO: So in order
to qualify for an Oscar,
you have to have a
certain theatrical run.
So that's playing
in New York City
for a week, a certain
amount of times,
a certain amount of days.
And then play in Los Angeles
for those same parameters.
And then you also have
to have a certain number
of critical reviews, so
from the "New York Times,"
and the "LA Times,"
"Village Voice."
All these people have reviewed
the film, mostly positively.
And from that certain
level of success,
we've qualified as a potential
for the future documentary
category.
>>LISA: Interesting.
So it's pretty much
a clear cut thing
that you have to fit into
certain qualifications.
>>ALVARADO: That's right.
>>LISA: How did you get the
distribution on the film?
How did you get
into these theaters?
How does that work?
As opposed to going
right to video.
>>ALVARADO: Sure.
Well, when we were
at film festivals,
we started to get approached
from different distributors who
wanted to distribute the film
theatrically and otherwise.
Gaiam TV actually
came along and was
very enthusiastic
about the film, thought
that it would be a successful
product for people who
were interested in health, and
longevity, and other things.
And so once we
talked to each other
and realized that this
would be a good partnership,
we signed off.
And now it's going really well.
>>LISA: And they're also helping
with the theatrical release
and getting it across the
country, and so forth?
>>ALVARADO: That's
right, through Gaiam TV
and another distributor
called Gathr,
which is a great distributor
for small filmmakers like Jason
and I.
>>LISA: Yeah,
that's interesting.
So you can really create any
type of theatrical release
through these companies.
And they assist you to do that
to get the information out
there.
And then the Q&A's and
so forth afterwards,
do you always
encourage the audience
to stick around and ask
questions, and so forth?
>>SUSSBERG: Yeah, if
we're there, typically,
we'll always entertainment a Q&A
and have a lively discussion.
>>LISA: What are the biggest
questions that you guys get?
>>ALVARADO: The
biggest questions--
it's always what about religion?
You didn't mention religion.
Or can you add more
science next time?
We're always happy to do it.
But then also, people
do want to know
if Jason and I are
willing to live longer.
If that would be something
that we would do.
And it's just so
fun to talk about.
So we really enjoy it.
>>LISA: And the average
age of the people that
come to see the movie,
are they older or younger?
>>ALVARADO: I'd say
across the board.
What would you say?
>>SUSSBERG: Yeah,
it's across the board.
I think it reflects folks
who go to film festivals.
And oftentimes,
they're students.
Sometimes, they're
young filmmakers
who want to watch a documentary.
Other times, they're
just an older baby boomer
crowd because that's the crowd
that goes to film festivals.
So it is across the board.
But I think it depends
on the flavor of the city
that we're playing and
what time we're playing.
11 o'clock in the
morning on Sunday
is going to be different
than 7 o'clock on Friday.
>>LISA: Right, right.
Exactly.
OK, so are we going to
get an "Immortalists 2"?
Or is the new middle
age going to be 90?
Is that what's happening?
>>ALVARADO: You know what?
We'll check in with Aubrey and
Bill when they're 90 years old.
Maybe we'll consider
doing a sequel then.
>>SUSSBERG: 190.
Give it some time.
>>LISA: Right.
190.
Living to 1,000 and beyond.
Well, thank you so much.
You've brought about a lot of
great points here in your film.
You did a great job of
explaining the story
in a beginning, middle,
and end of a film
so that we can make our
own decisions from it.
I think that's the quality
of a good documentary,
so that it actually
causes transformation
rather than doing the
transformation for you.
So it causes thought processes
and many different things.
So I appreciate you being here.
Thank you so much
for joining me today.
>>SUSSBERG: Thank you.
>>ALVARADO: Thanks.
>>LISA: And if you would like to
watch a replay of my interview
here with the filmmakers
of "The Immortalists,"
you can go to gaiamtv.com.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.